today little more than a decade after
the onset of Cuba's agricultural crisis
Cuba's countryside has been stabilized
despite like a frame fall and recurring
drought in eastern areas privately owned
small farms occupy a central place and
agricultural production I visited two
independent family farms and sancti
spíritus at both use a grow ecological
principles the first farm I visited was
on a steep hillside the land had been
given to the owner during an agrarian
reform after the Revolution and at the
time of my visit it was worked by three
family members
it became organic in about 1995 when the
owners altered their farming methods
because they felt that they were not
achieving adequate yields before
entering the farm area the soles of my
feet my hands were treated with a
chloride solution to deter the spread of
any disease I might have been exposed to
although visually quite beautiful the
landscape was inhospitable marked by
steep hillsides and erosion the farm has
not been easy to work but the owner and
his wife are extremely proud of the way
they've integrated the planting of crops
including pumpkin maize and beans
the smaller gana ponic or organic farm
produces vegetables and herbs for family
use plantains yucca rice corn and coffee
it also boasts nine kinds of fruit some
fowl and cattle for both milk and beef
at the time of my visit the farm had
received only 1/3 of his expected
rainfall so the workers had dug a well
which reached down 8 meters and was used
for irrigation the second privately
owned farm I visited was established in
1888 by the present owners grandfather
it was a seven hectares family farm
worked by seven individuals the farm
raises four crops including tobacco it
has both pasture land and areas devoted
to Agra forestry the workers also grow
herbs for green medicine
produce that fertilizer this farm is not
totally agro-ecological though because
the technology is not appropriate for
tobacco farming still the farmers have
used as many agro ecological methods as
possible and they also produce
biodynamic farming a type of farming
based on the cycles of the moon small
farmers on privately owned land like the
two I visited have become the backbone
of Cuba's agro ecological movement they
are more efficient and more productive
than those working on either
cooperatives or state farms they are
also more prosperous than other Cuban
workers